Ionospheric measurements using a LOFAR

Although the ionosphere mainly proves a nuisance for radio astronomy at low
frequencies, radio interferometric instruments can also be used to probe the
structure of the ionosphere. It is well known that the amount of disturbance
of an electromagnetic signal due to the ionospheric plasma scales with the
wavelength of the signal. With LOFAR's low frequencies we are able to detect
effects that are not seen by instruments operating at higher frequencies, such
as GNSS.

LOFAR is a large low frequency telescope, with a dense core of 24 stations
distributed within a 3 km diameter circle in the East of the
Netherlands. Another 14 Dutch stations have baselines up to 100 km, whereas 13
international stations are distributed over many countries in Europe. Each
stations consists of many antennas of two different types, the low band
antennas (LBA) with a frequency range between 30 and 80 MHz and the high band
(HBA) with the possibility to measure between 110 and 240MHz. The data of a
single station are added with appropriate delays to form a station beam in a
particular direction. These data can be used to produce dynamic spectra with
high time (sub second) and frequency (0.2 MHz) resolution.  In interferometric
mode, the data of all stations are correlated to create visibilities with
highest resolution of 1s, 3kHz. Typically, after flagging for RFI, these data
are processed at lower resolution.

With the LOFAR telescope we gain insight on the ionosphere in various
ways. Since ionospheric diffractive delays are a main source of calibration
errors, calibration parameters give a direct measure of the differential
integrated electron content over the array. Amplitude scintillation can be
measured with single station data and moving scintillation patterns are
observed if the data of more stations is combined.  Also, dual polarization
elements allow the measurement of rotation of the polarization angle of a
linear polarized signal due to the interaction with the ionospheric plasma and
the Earth magnetic field, known as Faraday rotation. Interestingly, even an
unpolarized signal can become artificially polarized if the Faraday rotation
effect above the two arms of an interferometric differ.

We have used the station beam data to find ionospheric scintillation patterns
of a bright astronomical source, such as Cas A. Comparing the scintillation
amplitudes of several stations, one gets a direct view of the patterns in the
ionosphere at the station positions projected along the line of sight. Imaging
these patterns in time this gives a movie of the ultra fine structures in
the ionosphere, moving around above the LOFAR core. Although at midlattitude,
at these frequencies amplitude scintillation is observed almost continuously,
contrary to what has been observed with GNSS measurements at higher
frequencies (R. A. Fallows et al, 2016 ApJL 828 L7).

In interferometric mode, the data of all stations are correlated and averaged
to typical 1 second time resolution. Since, in this mode the system is only
sensitive to the phase difference of a signal arriving at two stations, the
measured ionospheric effects are also mainly differential.  A linear gradient
in ionospheric TEC over the array will cause a (frequency dependent) shift of
the measured position of a source. Higher order terms will cause the source to
be deformed in the image plane.  Typically, the ionospheric variation in a
single direction can be described by a linear gradient for the LOFAR core,
where higher order terms show up at longer baselines. When imaging the
position shifts of a large number of sources inside the LOFAR beam as a vector
field, larger scale disturbances, like TIDs or duct like structures (e.g. Loi, S. T., et al. (2016), J. Geophys. Res. Space Physics, 121, 1569–1586), become visible over an area corresponding to the LOFAR beam. Although a
single pointing of the LOFAR HBA beam only corresponds to about 10 degrees,
and therefore to about 50 square km at an altitude of 300 km, it is possible
to use LOFAR in simultaneous multi beaming mode, sacrificing bandwidth for more
pointings.  In order to have enough S/N to measure the positions of hundreds
of sources with high enough accuracy, the time cadence of movies made in this
mode is typically 1 minute.

During calibration, station based phase errors are estimated by comparing a
model of the sources in the sky (usually a calibrator, a bright source in the
center of the beam) to the actual data. The ionospheric effects are separated
from other (instrumental) phase effects by making use of the wide bandwidth
and the typical frequency behavior of ionospheric delay. To first order the
ionospheric phase errors go with freq^-1, although at the lowest LOFAR
frequencies (<40 MHz) third order frequency effects (freq^-3) become
visible. Since phase errors can be measured with very high accuracy, LOFAR is
able to measure differential integrated total electron content (TEC) with an
accuracy smaller than 1 milliTECU (10^13 e-/m^2), using a typical HBA
calibrator observation with 10s integration. Using the phase solutions in the
direction of a single calibrator, we measure the differential TEC on an area
in the ionosphere equal to the footprint of LOFAR. (Mevius et al, 2016, Radio
Sci. 51, 927–941) 
The second order phase delay effect, Faraday rotation, scaling with (freq^-2),
causes a phase delay of circular polarized signals like GNSS. At LOFAR it
becomes visible as a rotation of the linear polarization angle. Given an Earth
magnetic field model, the measured time varying rotation angle of a polarized
source can give a direct measure of the absolute TEC (Sotomayor-Beltran C. et al 2013 A&A 552 A58). But even for an unpolarized source
the effect is visible if the ionospheric Faraday rotation angle above the
stations of a baseline differ, either because of differential TEC, or a
slightly different parallel magnetic field vector. In a recent paper we show
all three orders ofionospheric phase effects in LBA calibrator data (de
Gasperin et al, 2018, A&A,  https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201833012).

